clueless handsome
clever and totally rich and one of the
greatest
screen adaptations of jane austen's emma
ever
made amy heckerling rewrote austin's
kind
but meddling heroine emma into spoiled
plaid clad schoolgirl cher
with an equally good heart and the same
partial for ill-conceived matchmaking
clueless took everything that fans of
austin loved
the essence the witch the observational
comedy
and translated it perfectly into a pepe
90s rom-com equivalent
yeah you know if i ever saw you do
anything it wasn't 90 selfish i'd die of
shock
that'd be reason enough for me a wave of
like-minded movies followed
funny quippy glossy teen comedies which
reimagined classic works of literature
but why do these stories originally
written centuries ago
feel so at home amongst the bleachers
and the locker rooms
[Music]
obviously some changes have to be made
when updating something written
hundreds of years ago heckling switches
up austin's traditional
wedding finale casting cher's
middle-aged school teachers as the happy
couple
after all it would be icky for a 90s
schoolgirl to fall in love with a man
16 years her senior as emma did with mr
nightly
instead cher making out with her
stepbrother josh
kept in that slightly morally ambiguous
relationship
while potential pseudo-christian turning
out to be gay both
modernised the story and allowed for
some charming scenes of cher attempting
to woo
a gay teen are you okay
the taboo of step sibling lust also
rears its head in cruel intentions but
this time
it's not nearly so innocent the film was
distinctly naughtier than its peers
exploring a manipulative series of
seductions
similar to those that scandalized
readers of the original text
liaisons by pierre schodolo de la clou
everybody loves me and i intend to keep
it that way
this story works so well centuries later
because within the vicious and
judgmental social circles
of pre-revolution france your reputation
is your life
sound familiar manhattan prep school
cliques
have that same ability to make or break
you
so catherine's downfall aka the total
ruin of her reputation
is akin to death gentlemen we have a
winner
spoilt rich kids making bets is at the
heart of another great
teen adaptation
admittedly she's all that plays fast and
loose with the plot of george bernard
shaw's pygmalion
but high school is a great place to show
the extremity
of the class divide isn't your dad my
poor man
i really wouldn't know lainey boggs and
hot jock zack
are totally at odds economically and
socially
but while shaw's original finishes with
a new and improved eliza doolittle
lainey's life doesn't really change
because zach made a bet about making her
prom queen
she remains her bad herself all the way
through
and it's zach whose life is irrevocably
changed by the last
dance
[Music]
pygmalion couldn't work in a modern
setting without this
feminist take
[Music]
and speaking of feminists here's one of
the most
iconic cat from 10 things i hate about
you is
everyone's high school hero and pretty
close to katarina
the eponymous shrew who everyone
despises in shakespeare's misogynistic
the taming of the shrew
people perceive you as somewhat
tempestuous
heinous is the term used most
often the reason why they're both
outcasts
is essentially the same despite the
400-year chasm
because they both have the temerity to
say no to a man
the major difference here is that the
film swaps manipulative petruchio
for charismatic bad boy patrick verona
he realizes that he doesn't want to
change cat but rather
steps up to meet her expectations of him
and in one of the most heart-melting
moments in teen movie history
sacrifices himself on the altar of
[Music]
dignity
god you and your brother looks scary
like from the back on the other hand
she's the man is a very literal
retelling
with its version of 12 night but apart
from just keeping the original character
names horatio gold
malcolm festies viola what's up i'm
sebastian
this film probably has the most fun with
its shakespearisms peppered throughout
welcome to illyria the exotic setting of
valyria is now a college
viola's original alter ego cesario
is now a pizza joint and the uptight
steward malvolio
is well a tarantula
but when it comes to tragedies these
high school adaptations are harder to
translate
by setting shakespeare's bleakest
tragedy othello
on a college basketball court you'd
think there'd be room for a raised
eyebrow or at least
a knowing smirk but oh with its
well-meaning attempt to take these
tragic themes
very seriously feels at odds with the
flippant
tongue-in-cheek approach that we've come
to expect from this genre
and unforgivably turns iago
one of the most insidious and infamous
villains in literary history
into a petulant school kid whose daddy
doesn't love him
is there some reason you're still in
this office son however
mackay pfeiffer's odin is still the only
lead
character of colour in these adaptations
a sub-genre which for all of its
modernizations and rule breaking
keeps its lead characters as white as
they would have been
400 years ago
you can just change 400 year old
literature
actually you can 2001's get over it
took a distinctly meta approach to its
adaptation of a midsummer night's dream
where would-be lovers burke and kelly
mimic
some of the actions of shakespearean
lovers lysander
and helena but to really push that 90s
post-modernism further the film is also
about the characters putting on a
bastardized musical
called a midsummer night rocking eve
[Music]
making shakespeare's most famous play
about a play
into a high school film adaptation about
a musical
of a play about a play trust me
it works
[Applause]
but if there's one thing that clueless
has taught us it's how quickly trends
become
so last season and it wasn't long before
teen literary adaptations petered out
my life is over that's it however in a
world where battles are fought in one on
sports pitches
reputation is everything and getting a
date for prom can feel like life or
death
high school will always be the perfect
modern setting for many much-loved
classics
[Music]
you